1: Ann Intern Med  1979 Apr;90(4):509-17Legionnaires' disease: clinical features of the epidemic in Philadelphia.Tsai TF, Finn DR, Plikaytis BD, McCauley W, Martin SM, Fraser DW.A review of the medical records of 123 persons with Legionnaires' diseasehospitalized in the 1976 Philadelphia epidemic showed that the manifestations ofinfection ranged from mild grippe to a severe pneumonia that also involved otherorgan systems. Early in the illness, constitutional symptoms predominated.Fever, malaise, myalgia, rigors, confusion, headache, and diarrhea were usuallyfollowed by nonproductive cough and dyspnea. Physical examination showed fewabnormalities other than rales. Moderate leukocytosis with left shift, elevatederythrocyte sedimentation rate, elevation of serum levels of liver enzymes, andhematuria and proteinuria were characteristic. Chest radiograph showed patchy,often nodular, areas of consolidation. Progression of pneumonia led torespiratory failure and the need for mechanical ventilatory assistance for 19patients; renal failure, primarily after shock, occurred in 18 persons.Twenty-six patients died. Treatment with erythromycin or tetracycline resultedin the lowest case-fatality ratios, but the associations were not statisticallysignificant.PMID: 434627 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2: Ann Intern Med  1979 Apr;90(4):704-7Lessons from Legionnaires' disease.Hudson RP.In July 1976 a pneumonialike epidemic from a previously unrecognizedmicroorganism erupted among Legionnaires who had attended a meeting inPhiladelphia. There were an estimated 182 cases, in which 29 patients died.Among other things the episodes shows that even in a medically sophisticatedindustrialized nation, a bacterical pathogen can produce a small epidemic anddefy identification for almost 6 months. One historical implication of the eventis the need to consider the possibility of a return of large-scale epidemicdisease rivaling the sweeps of bubonic plague in fourteenth-century Europe. Suchepidemics could occur through any of a variety of microorganismic mechanismsrecognized as operating at the present time. It is suggested that humans wouldreact to such a disaster much as their progenitors did centuries ago.Publication Types:Historical ArticlePMID: 373556 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]3: Ann Intern Med  1979 Apr;90(4):699-703Legionnaires' disease: one person's perspective.Sanford JP.Since July 1976 when an outbreak of severe, acute respiratory disease of unknownorigin occurred among attendees at the 58th Annual Convention of the AmericanLegion in Philadelphia, great progress has been made, including identificationof the causative organism, Legionella pneumophila. Clinical features include notonly respiratory involvement but often abdominal complaints, encephalopathy,renal disease, and rhabdomyolysis. Erythromycin appears to be an effectiveantimicrobial agent. Epidemiologic studies have defined epidemics as well assporadic cases. Legionella pneumophila has appeared as an opportunisticpathogen. Organisms have been isolated from air-handling equipment andevaporative condensers in four instances. At present diagnosis usually is basedon the demonstration of a fourfold rise in antibody titer between serumspecimens obtained 3 to 6 weeks apart. Recent data suggest that organisms may beshown in tracheal secretions using a direct flluorescent antibody procedure andthat antigen may be shown in urine using the microenzyme-linked immunosorbentassay (ELISA) technique.PMID: 373555 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]4: Ann Intern Med  1979 Apr;90(4):522-6The Philadelphia epidemic of Legionnaire's disease: clinical, pulmonary, andserologic findings two years later.Lattimer GL, Rhodes LV 3rd, Salventi JS, Galgon JP, Stonebraker V, Boley S, HaasG.Clinical, pulmonary, and serologic findings in Legionnaires who attended the1976 American Legion Convention in Philadelphia were studied 2 years after theLegionnaires' disease epidemic there. All 31 survivors of Legionnaires' diseasestudied became ill within 2 weeks after the convention, and 18 had not fullyrecovered 2 years after the epidemic. Twenty-five (28%) of 90 additionalLegionnaires exposed at the convention but not diagnosed as having Legionnaires'disease became ill during the same time interval; five of these had symptomsduring the next 2 years. Survivors had decreased diffusion capacities measuredby the carbon monoxide single-breath method. These differences could not beaccounted for by ventilation abnormalities or concurrent illness. Significantlevels of IgG or IgM antibodies persisted in 94% of survivors of Legionnaires'disease and in 53% of Legionnaires exposed at the convention, which suggests ahigh prevalence of subclinical infection. Persistence of IgM antibody raises thequestion of latency or subclinical infection as part of the natural history ofLegionnaires' disease.PMID: 373542 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]5: Lancet  1978 Jul 15;2(8081):122-41974 outbreak of Legionnaires' Disease diagnosed in 1977. Clinical andepidemiological features.Terranova W, Cohen ML, Fraser DW.An illness characterized by high fever and pneumonia struck 2.9% of a group ofthe Independent Order of Odd Fellows attending a convention held inPhiladelphia, in September, 1974. The convention headquarters was the hotelwhere the American Legion met in July, 1976. The epidemiological, clinical, andlaboratory characteristics of the illness were nearly identical to those of thedisease in American legionnaires in 1976. Illness was significantly associatedwith attendance at one convention activity held on Monday morning, Sept. 16,1974, in the grand ballroom of the hotel. A serological survey in February andMarch, 1977, showed that people who had attended the convention and became illwere more likely to have raised indirect fluorescent antibody titres thanpersons who had attended and remained well. The illness seen in Odd Fellowsmembers in September, 1974, was caused by the legionnaire's disease organism.PMID: 78324 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]6: Arch Pathol Lab Med  1978 Jul;102(7):337-43Legionnaires' disease. Pathological and historical aspects of a 'new' disease.Blackmon JA, Hicklin MD, Chandler FW.Autopsy tissues and protocols from 26 epidemiologically defined fatal cases ofLegionnaires' disease occurring during the 1976 Philadelphia outbreak werereviewed. Consistent pathologic features were limited to the lung, where anacute pneumonia characterized by intra-alveolar exudation of neutrophils,macrophages, and fibrin was observed. An etiologic agent common to most of thevictims of Legionnaires' disease was identified within the pneumonic process byapplication of the Dieterle silver impregnation stain. In some cases, otherpulmonary histologic findings were noted, chiefly acute diffuse alveolar damage.However, the importance of acute diffuse alveolar damage is not understood.PMID: 580865 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]7: JAMA  1978 Feb 13;239(7):640-1Sporadic Legionnaires' disease.Jones FL, Beecham HJ 3rd, Dennehy JJ.The first case of Legionnaires' disease recognized in Pennsylvania since thePhiladelphia epidemic of 1976 was that of a 53-year-old emphysematous man whohad extensive unilateral pneumonia accompanied by high fever, hypoxemia, anddisorientation. His illness progressed despite treatment with cephalothin, buthe recovered coincident with the administration of gentamicin and erythromycin.The diagnosis was established serologically by a 32-fold rise in antibody titerto the agent of Legionnaires' disease. Similar illness did not affect others inhis community, and infection in four family members was excluded clinically andserologically.PMID: 340716 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]8: N Engl J Med  1977 Dec 1;297(22):1189-97Legionnaires' disease: description of an epidemic of pneumonia.Fraser DW, Tsai TR, Orenstein W, Parkin WE, Beecham HJ, Sharrar RG, Harris J,Mallison GF, Martin SM, McDade JE, Shepard CC, Brachman PS.An explosive, common-source outbreak of pneumonia caused by a previouslyunrecognized bacterium affected primarily persons attending an American Legionconvention in Philadelphia in July, 1976. Twenty-nine of 182 cases were fatal.Spread of the bacterium appeared to be air borne. The source of the bacteriumwas not found, but epidemiologic analysis suggested that exposure may haveoccurred in the lobby of the headquarters hotel or in the area immediatelysurrounding the hotel. Person-to-person spread seemed not to have occurred. Manyhotel employees appeared to be immune, suggesting that the agent may have beenpresent in the vicinity, perhaps intermittently, for two or more years.PMID: 335244 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]9: Ann Intern Med  1976 Oct;85(4):516-8Influenza in 1918: recollections of the epidemic in Philadelphia.Starr I.When the great influenza epidemic struck Philadelphia in 1918, the author wasjust starting his third year at the University of Pennsylvania School ofMedicine. After a single lecture on influenza, classes for the third and fourthyear students were suspended while he and his mates manned an emergencyhospital, in which they worked under little or no medical supervision and in thepresence of an alarming patient mortality. This essay describes what happened inthe hospital, and in the city as a whole, during the pandemic. Certain featuresof the clinical course of most patients permit the hope that modern therapy willprevent a repetition of the horrendous mortality.Publication Types:Historical ArticlePMID: 788585 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]